 See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/225830630 Wittgenstein and Finitism
Article in Synthese · November 1995 DOI: 10.1007/BF01064216
CITATIONS
12
1 author:
Mathieu Marion
Université du Québec à Montréal
60 PUBLICATIONS 320 CITATIONS SEE PROFILE
READS
178
    Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Early dialectic View project
  All content following this page was uploaded by Mathieu Marion on 01 October 2014. The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
 
 MATHIEU MARION
WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM
Im Aufbau der Mathematik gibt es zwei offene Stellen, woes mOglicherweise ins Unergriindliche geht: der Fortgang in der Reihe der natiirlichen Zahlen und das Kontinuum.
HERMANN WEYL
ABSTRACT.
between Wittgenstein's remarks ot~ mathematics, written during his transitional period, and free-variable finitism. After giving a brief description of the Trac;atus Logico-Philosophicus on quantifiers and generality, I present in the frst section Wittgenstein's rejection of quan- tification theory and his account of general arithmetical propositions, to use modern jargon, as claims (as opposed to statements). As in Skolem's primitive recursive arithmetic and Goodstein's equational calculus, Wittgenstein represented generality by the use of free variables. This has the effect that negation of unbounded universal and existential proposi- tions cannot be expressed. This is claimed in the second section to be the basis for Wittgen- stein's criticism of the universal validity of the law of excluded middle. In the last section, there is a brief discussion of Wittgenstein's remarks on real numbers. These show a prefer- ence, in line with finitism, for a recursive version of the continuum.
INTRODUCTION
Wittgenstein is almost invariably interpreted as defending a form of con- structivism in philosophy of mathematics,1but opinions diverge as to the nature of this constructivism. His name is usually associated with the foundational programme of strict finitism.2 In contrast to this prevailing view, the parallels between Wittgenstein and intuitionism were also stressed.3 I would like to offer my own contribution to this debate by bringing to the fore some (elementary) connections between the views held by Wittgenstein during the so-called transitional period (1929-1935) and finitism, more precisely, a form of finitism the model of which is Thoralf Skolem's primitive recursive arithmetic or Louis Goodstein's equational calculus.
I shall limit myself to a discussion of three topics. First, I shall give a detailed account of Wittgenstein's critique of classical quantification theory, where his commitment to finitism is most obvious. As a conse- quence of my reading of Wittgenstein on general arithmetical propositions, I shall offer an explanation of his often misunderstood criticism of the universal validity of the law of excluded middle. There are many others topics where a proper reading of Wittgenstein on quantification and free- variable finitism may help to reconstruct his position. I chose to discuss
Synthese 105: i41-176, I995.
© 1995 Kluwer Academic Publishers, Printed in the Netherlands.
in this paper, elementary but hitherto overlooked connections are established

 142 MATHIEU MARION
in the last part of the paper Wittgenstein's remarks on real numbers, where he was opting for a recursive version of the continuum.
In contrast with most authors, I shall avoid as much as possible dis- cussing any writing posterior to the Philosophical Grammar. I shall there- fore make few specific claims about the later remarks; my intention is to describe an important but much neglected chapter in the evolution of Wittgenstein's thoughts on the foundations of mathematics. It should also be said that it was not my intention in writing this paper to evaluate Wittgenstein's stance, only to achieve clarity, and I do not pretend to have exhausted the richness of Wittgenstein' s detailed analyses.4
1. QUANTIFICATION AND FINITISM
I shall begin with a brief discussion of the theory of quantification in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, and then make some remarks about generality. Proposition 6 tells us that the general form of the proposition is
[1~,(, N(()]
By this Wittgenstein meant that any proposition is the result of successive applications of the operation N to the elementary propositions P - the possibility of an infinite number of propositions is to be found here, in the general form of the proposition, i.e. in the indefinite iterability of this operation. For ( the values of the variable ~ must be determined (3.316, 3.317, 5.501) and the determination of the variables is the description of the propositions for which the variable stands. There are, according to 5.501, three possible kinds of description of these propositions: they can be given either by a direct enumeration or as values of a Russellian propositional function F(x), i.e. by "giving a function fx whose valttes for all values of x are the propositions to be described" (5.501), or through a formal law which constructs the propositions. One important fact about these three kinds of description is that their differences were deemed unessential by Wittgenstein: "How the description of the terms of the expression in brackets takes place is unessential" (5.501).
Wittgenstein built his truth-functional account accordingly, as follows: if( hasonlyonevalue,thenN(O =-1p;ifithastwovalues,thenIKI(O= q p A -1 q (5.51): For general propositions where the values of the vari-
able ~ are given as the values of a function - as in (5.52) - say for any F(x) whose values are F(a), F(b) and F(c); N(F(x)) would be a proposition of the form:
F(a) A-7F(b) /x~F(c).
According to this account, Vx F(x) is, simplifying a little, a logical product and 3x F(x) as a logical sum, 5 i.e.

 and
WITTOENSTEIN AND FINITISM 143 VxF(x)~F(a)/x F(b) A F(e) A ...
3x F(x) <-+F(a) v F(b) v F(c) v ...
For our purposes, the most important aspect of Wittgenstein's treatment of quantification is that he assumed that there is no problem with quantifi- cation over an infinite domain. To use Wittgenstein's own jargon, his treatment of generality meant that even in cases where no enumeration is possible, it is still possible to consider the universal quantifier as a logical product. 6As I take it (from Georg Kreisel's reminiscence of a conversation with him), Wittgenstein put down his system in a finite setting without bothering about the infinite case, assuming that if a problem was to be found in the infinite case, then there would have already been a problem in the finite case.
One other important aspect of Wittgenstein's treatment of quantification is, in the words of Max Black that "Wittgenstein links the essence of generality with the notion of a variable, rather than with that of a quantifi- er" (1964, p. 282). Indeed, generality is distinguished in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus from truth-functions. It comes with the specification of the arguments as the values of a given propositional function and differs from truth-functions per se which are the logical product for the universal quantifier and the logical sum for the existential quantifier (5.521). This distinction has to do with the notion of "logical prototype" (5.522). In proposition 3.315, Wittgenstein tells us that an expression such as aRb where all components would be changed into variables would be called a "logical prototype". Still following 3.315, one can say that an expression such as xRb, x being a variable, collects all the propositions of the form
- R b . (This is why Wittgenstein said that the symbolism of generality "makes constants prominent" (5.522), as Ramsey clearly saw (1925, pp. 28-9).) So given aRb we can pass to xRb and, once we have this as the set of all propositions of the form - R b , the expression Vx (xRb) is just the proposition which is a truth-function of these, while generality is expressed by the use of the variable x. This aspect of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus already shows the connaturalness of Wittgenstein's ideas with Skolem's primitive recursive arithmetic.
In 6.1232, Wittgenstein distinguished an "essential" form of general validity from the "accidental" form:
Logical general validity, we could call essential as opposed to accidental general validity, e.g. of the proposition 'all men are mortal'. (6.1232)
Now, logical propositions (tautologies) were thought by Wittgenstein to be all inductively generated 7 from the elementary propositions by the joint negation operation N and, therefore, although Wittgenstein thought that the fact that logical propositions are generally valid does not demarcate

 144 MATHIEU MARION
them from non-logical propositions - since to be general in logic means no more than to be "accidentally valid for all things" (6.1231) - logical propositions do in fact possess logical general validity.
This "essential" or "logical" validity was also considered by Wittg- enstein as an essential feature of mathematical pseudo-propositions: it derives from the fundamental fact that members of a formal series are all generated by a formal law. But the theory of classes as he knew it from Principia Mathematica needs axioms such as the axiom of reducibility or the axiom of infinity which are admittedly not logical propositions. At best, these would possess only "accidental" general validity and this is the reason why Wittgenstein thought that such a set-theoretical axiomatisation could play no (foundational) role in mathematics:
The theory of classes is altogether superfluous in mathematics. This is connected with the fact that the generality, which we need in mathematics is not the accidental one. (6.031)
In Wittgenstein's jargon, a formal law is an "operation" or an "internal relation". 8 The most important feature of the notion of internal relation, which is introduced in Section 4.122, is that two entities are said to be internally related if it is inconceivable that they do not stand in such a relation: "A property is internal if it is unthinkable that its objects do not possess it" (4.123). This notion plays a crucial role within the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, since Wittgenstein defined 'formal series' as series "which are ordered by internal relations":
Series which are ordered by internal relations I call formal series. The series of numbers is ordered not by an external, but by an internal relation. Similarly the series of propositions "aRb",
"(3x): aRx . xRb", "(3x,y): aRx . xRy . yRb", etc. (4.1252)
Here, Wittgenstein adds, "If b stands in one of these relations to a, I call b a successor of a" (Wittgenstein 1922, 4.1252). It is clear, therefore, that Wittgenstein intended to take as a primitive the notion of recursive (iterative) process, in contrast with logicists such as Frege who tried to explain the above notion of "successor of" in terms of the ancestral relation, which is known in Principia Mathernatica as R*.
Using the ancestral relation, logicists were able to provide an explicit definition of the natural numbers series; but it requires a set-theoretic apparatus (for correlating sets) which was not available to Wittgenstein. Consequently, he had to reject explicit definitions and, in parallel with Poincar6, he criticized them as circular. Henri Poincar6 was indeed the first to claim that logicist definitions of the natural numbers are circular and it is possible that Wittgenstein had Poincar6's remarks in mind when, in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, he criticized the Frege-Russell definition of the ancestral relation from his own standpoint:9
If we want to express in logical symbolism the general proposition 'b is successor of a' we need for this an expression for the general term of the formal series: aRb, (3x): aRx. xRb,

 WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 145
(3x,y): aRx. xRy. yRb.... The general term of the formal series can only be expressed by a variable, for the concept symbolized by 'term of this formaI series' is a formal concept. (This Frege and Russell overlooked; the way in which they express general propositions like the above is, therefore, false; it contains a vicious circle.) (4.1273) 1°
In order to see what "variable" was to express the general term of the formal series, one must go to 5.2522
The general term of the formal series a, O'a, O'O'a,.... I write thus: "[a, x, O'x]". This expression in brackets is a variable. The first term of the expression is the beginning of the formal series, the second the form of an arbitrary term x of the series, and the third the form of that term of the series which immediately follows x. (5.2522)
Wittgenstein's definition of the natural numbers was closely modeled on the "variable"
[a, x, O'x]
(I shall come back to this "variable" towards the end of this section); it was
designed precisely to highlight the recursive nature of natural numbers. ~1
Wittgenstein put the emphasis, against the logicists, on the "and so on", 12
After returning to Vienna in the late twenties, Wittgenstein was in contact with the intuitionist critique of classical mathematics, through hearing Brouwer in Vienna in 1928 and through discussing papers by Hermann Weyl with Moritz Schlick and Friedrich Waismann in 1929. It is also probable that some of his discussions with Ramsey, when he re- turned to Cambridge in 1929, were on topics related to intuitionism. So, although Wittgenstein was to ultimately disagree with many aspects of intuitionism, it was to play an important role in the evolution of his thought. For the sake of brievity, I shall concentrate in my description on Weyl's influential account of Brouwer's ideas, in his 1921 paper '6~ber die neue Grundlagenkrise der Mathematik" (1921).
According to Weyl, propositions containing an existential quantifier ranging over the natural numbers do not possess the full status of state- ments (Weyl used instead the word Urteil): for F a decidable predicate, the proposition 3x F(x) can be asserted only if one knows already a specific number a of which one can show that it satisfies the predicate F, i.e. one abstracts 3x F(x) from F(a), or
F(a) F(x).
For this reason, Weyl described existential propositions as Urteilsabstrakte or "judgement-abstracts":
An existential sentence - e.g. "there is an even number" - is not at all a judgement which asserts a fact & the proper sense. Existential-facts are an empty invention of logicians. "2 is an even number": this is a real judgement expressing a fact; "there is an even number" is only a judgement-abstract obtained from this judgement. (1921, p. 156)
Likewise, propositions containing a universal quantifier ranging over the

 146 MATHIEU MARION
natural numbers aren't statements either. Weyl called them Anweisungen auf Urteile, that is "instructions", "requests" or "rules for judging":
The general "Every number has the property F" - e.g. "for each number m, m + 1 = 1 + rn" is equally little a real judgement, it is rather a general rule for judging. (1921, p. 157)
To explain what Weyl meant, I shall take his own example: if three pieces of chalk are exhibited to me and I say "all the pieces of chalk are white", then this proposition is a statement which is either true or false, since it is an abbreviation for a finite conjunction:
this piece is white A this piece is white A this piece is white.
This is the assertion of a proper statement because the pieces of chalk are exhibited and an enumeration is possible. But if the domain is infinite, as in the case of universally quantified arithmetical propositions, the exhibition becomes impossible and the proposition cannot be interpreted as an ab- breviation for an infinite disjunction. Such a proposition, Weyl would say, has "obviously no meaning" (1929, p. 152). 13
What Weyl meant when he said that an arithmetical proposition is a 'rule for judging' was that it justifies the deduction of an infinity of singular propositions F(a), i.e.
Vx F(x) -, V(a),
while it is not asserting anything by itself. In a later paper, 'The Ghost of
Modality', Weyl described it as
•.. a hypothetical proposition, saying something only in case that...: "In case you come across a certain number (whatever this number may be) you may be sure it has the property IF]". (1940, p. 701)
To use another jargon, Weyl provided an account of propositions con- taining an existential or a universal quantifier ranging over the natural numbers in terms of claims, as opposed to statements. Indeed, a proposi- tion involving unrestricted universal quantification is construed by Weyl not as a true statement, but as a claim that the speaker possesses an effective means of establishing the truth of any given statement from a given infinite range. In 'The Source of the Concept of Truth', Dummett described this distinction in the following terms:
... even if we operate with the classical conception of a large class of utterances that constitutes assertions of statements with determinate truth-conditions, we shall still need to acknowledge that not all informative utterances belong to that class. Other informative utterances may be classified, not as assertions of statements, but as expressions of claims: statements are to be assessed as true or false, but claims as justified or unjustified. (1990, ~. '4)
Dummett's example of a class of informative utterances which should be classified as claims is precisely that of arithmetical propositions involving

 WtTTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 147
unrestricted quantification. In this paper, he attributed this point to Hil- bert; we have just seen that it was already in Weyl.
But why is it exactly that existential and universal propositions cannot be said to be genuine statements? Because, to use Michael Dummett's words, "the condition for someone to be entitled to make any such utter- ance is inseparably connected with his own cognitive position" (1990, p. 2). The fact that a mathematician does not possess an instance F(a) and that he is therefore not in a position to assert 3x F(x), does not entitle him to assert the negation ~F(a) of the flee-variable statement, even less to assert Vx 7 F(x), and vice-versa.
An elementary mathematical example such as Euclid's theorem on the infinity of prime numbers may help us understand Weyl's idea. The theo- rem says that "prime numbers are more than any assigned multitude of prime numbers". The proof (by reductio ad absurdum) goes as follows: we start by supposing that there is a greatest prime number pn. We should therefore be able to list all the prime numbers:
Pl •••P~
We then define the number N:
N= [p,.P2.P3..... Pn]+1
This number N is either prime or composite. If it is prime, then we have a contradiction, since it would be bigger than all the prime numbers ~<p~ and there would be more than n prime numbers. If it is composite, it must be divisible exactly by a prime number. But this prime divisor cannot be any prime ~p~ because they would all leave a remainder of 1. Therefore there must be another prime number, bigger than p,~.From Weyl's view- point, the proposition "there exists a prime number x such that n < x ~<N" expresses a proper statement, because with N one remains within a finite domain. Moreover, the proof gives us enough information to find the next prime number. But if the domain is infinite as in the case of the proposition "there exists a prime number x such that n < x", the exhibition is impos- sible and the proposition cannot be interpreted as an abbreviation for an infinite disjunction:
n+l is prime v n+2is prime v n+3 is prime v n+4is prime v...
and unless the speaker knows already one such specific number x > n of which she can show that it is prime, she is not in a position to assert 3x F(x), since it would be an unjustified claim. As Wittgenstein himself would say:
Surely that is nonsense, For ~'If we only search long enough" has no meaning, (That goes for existence proofs in general.) (1974, p. 384)
The most important consequence of this reading of general propositions

 148 MATHIEU MARION
is that the law of excluded middle cannot be applied to them. Indeed, since the fact that a mathematician does not possess an instance F(a) does not entitle her to assert the negation -~F(a) - and this is tantamount to the assertion Vx-7 F(x) - the equivalence between Vx-7 F(x) and ~3x F(x) does not hold and the law of excluded middle does not apply. As Weyl would say:
•.. it is completely senseless to negate such sentences, therefore the possibility of formulating the law of excluded middle in regard to these sentences disappears. (1921, p. 158)
Before continuing, one final remark on Weyl's 1921 paper. Its real interest lies in his account of dependent quantifiers, i.e. of formulas such as:
Vx 3y F(x, y)
It was Weyl's account of these which interested Ramsey so much in 1929.14 He clearly adopted it in his paper 'Principles of Finitist Mathematics', where he claimed that "the proper method seems to be Weyl's" (1929b, p. 256). Weyl's account had two parts. First, one constructs a law (Gesetz), i.e. a function
F(x) = y
which generates out of every number x a new number y. In this way one can introduce the general proposition
Vx B(x, F(x)).
Now, from every singular sentence derived from this general proposition, one can abstract an existential sentence of the form
3x B(a, x).
The real meaning of the es gibt comes therefore from the introduction of the function F(x) = y, from which one derives the existence of the individ- uals y. This is why Weyl said that the es gibt must include the alle and not vice-versa (1921, p. 159). This is the "method" with which Ramsey agreed in 1929 (Majer 1989, pp. 247f.).
Weyl's account of general arithmetical propositions had quite an influ- ence. In his famous paper 'Ober das Unendliche', David Hilbert claimed that "finitary" general propositions - i.e. II°-sentences - cannot be under- stood as infinite logical products because they cannot be negated.15 More- over, Frank Ramsey's posthumous papers indicate that he moved towards finitism during the last year of his life16changing his views about quantifi- cation by adopting Weyl's reading of general propositions as "founts of judgements, or rules for judging" (1929d, p. 235). 17 For example, in one of his 1929 papers, 'General Propositions and Causality', Ramsey ex- pressed the view that there are two kinds of general propositions: these are conjunctions when the domain is finite and objects are all concretely

 WITTGENSTtEIN AND FINITISM 149
given, but general propositions such as "all men are mortal" are what he called "variable hypotheticals". Like Weyl's Urteilsanweisungen,variable hypotheticals do not possess the full status of statements. Their status was indeed described by Ramsey in terms strikingly similar to Weyl's:
Variable hypotheticals are not judgements but rules for judging "If I meet a ~b, I shall, regard it as a 0". This cannot be negatedbut it can be disagreedwith by one who does not adopt it. (1929a, p. 137).
For Ramsey too, general arithmetica! propositions were not genuine state- ments but, rather, variable hypotheticals. In support, I shall simply give one quotation, from another 1929 manuscript, 'The Formal Structure of Intuitionist Mathematics':
It seems then that a generN mathematical proposition does not correspond to a .judgement in the way, a singular proposition does, although by substitution it leads to such judgements and truth function,s of any finite number of such judgements. When we have proved such a proposition we can, of course, make the judgement that we have proved it (and the judgement that any instance of it is true) but this is not an equivalent to the proposition itself e.g. "I have not proved p" is not the same as ~q have proved not-p". (1929c, p. 204)
(One may read here "statement" instead of °'judgement".) Ramsey also found causal laws akin to variable hypotheticals, as we can see from the following passage, taken from 'General Propositions and Causality':
•.. when we assert a causal law we are asserting not a fact, not an infinite conjunction, nor a connection of universals, but a variable hypothetical which is not strictly a proposition at all, but a formula from which we derive propositions. (Ramsey 1929a, p. 147)
Wittgenstein also considered general arithmetical propositions as some kind of "hypotheticais", from which one can derive statements while they aren't asserting anything by themselves. (This should be seen as a development of the Tractarian conception of mathematical propositions as 'pseudo-propositions'.) Still in parallel with Ramsey, 18 Wittgenstein entertained the same idea about causal laws, which he called "hypo- theses", claiming in the Philosophical Remarks that an hypothesis is "a law for forming propositions" (1965, §228), and that if it "can't be defi- nitely verified, it can't be verified at all, and there is no truth or falsity for it" (1965, §226). 19This distinction between Hypothesen and Aussagen, which prefigures in many ways the above distinction between claims and statements, is crucial for our understanding of Wittgenstein's development during the transitional period. It should also be said that, although I emphasized the similarities between Ramsey's and Wittgenstein's account, there are important differences. I cannot, however, discuss these questions further. 2°
There is evidence that Wittgenstein discussed infinity and quantification with Ramsey in 1929.21 Sadly, there exists almost no record of these conversations.22But a careful reading of Wittgenstein's writings from 1929 onwards indicate beyond all doubt that he also came to realize that there

 150 MATHIEU MARION
was a problem with quantification over infinite domains. 23 Alice Ambro- se's and G. E. Moore's lecture notes are good witnesses to Wittgenstein's change of mind about the conception of quantification in Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus: Wittgenstein stated clearly during his Cambridge lectures (1932) that the idea that quantifiers are to be understood as infinite conjunctions or disjunctions was mistaken,a4 In one particular passage of Moore's lecture notes, we find Wittgenstein speaking of the class of primary colours as "defined by grammar" (Wittgenstein 1959, p. 297). Here an enumeration is possible and the proposition "in this square there is one of the primary colours" is identical with the logical sum: "in this square there is either red or blue or yellow". Wittgenstein then claimed that his mistake in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus was to suppose that in all classes defined by grammar general propositions were identical with a logical product or a logical sum, as in the case of primary colours. What were his reasons to see a mistake in his earlier conception? Because Wittgenstein saw, from 1929 onwards, an infinitely long conjunc- tion (or disjunction) as an impossibility, not because of human limitations but because "infinite" is not a number. It is, as Wittgenstein put it, a "possibility of the symbolism". Therefore, in parallel with Weyl and Ram- sey, Wittgenstein could only see the universal quantifier as a logical prod- uct when the dots following the expression "and so on" were, as he called them, "dots of laziness", i.e. an abbreviation for a finite enumeration,a5 Infinite series being "defined by grammar" in a different way than finite sequences are, they could not be represented as a logical product or sum.
As I just said, this reasoning bears strong similarities with Weyl's ac- count and Ramsey's remarks in 1929. But, during a meeting with Schlick and Waismann in January 1930, Wittgenstein claimed that '°Weyl lumps several different things together" (Wittgenstein 1979b, p. 82), and he rejected his account:
Weyl pretends there may indeed be universal statements (All-Aussage)but they do not have negations, on the ground that an existential statement (Existenzaussage)is a 'judgement- abstraction' (Urteilsabstrakt)and that only construction(findinga number) tells us anything. Butinrealitythesearetwocompletelydifferentthings- auniversalstatement(All-Aussage) is correctly expressed by means of induction and as such it naturally cannot be negated. (Wittgenstein1979b,p. 81)
Wittgenstein's account of Weyl's argument is slightly erroneous. He took it to be that a general proposition such as Vx F(x) cannot have a negation because such a negation would be equivalent to a purely existential propo- sition, and the latter can only be judgement-abstracts. But Weyl was not exactly "lumping" universal and existential propositions together: he thought that negations of general propositions with unrestricted quantifi- cation are not umfangs-definit, and this is why these can't be negated (Weyl 1921, p. 155). This quotation is nevertheless instructive. To my mind, the fact that Wittgenstein misunderstood Weyl's position is a good

 WtTTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 151
indication that he could not have been influenced by him. In fact, I shall show that his transitional views are a development of Tractarian positions. Moreover, we learn that Wittgenstein thought that his account of general propositions was different to that of Weyl precisely because of his own view that they are "correctly expressed by means of induction". In the same meeting with Schlick and Waismann, Wittgenstein reiterated this point:
An assertion (Aussage) about all numbers is not represented by means of a proposition (Satz), but by means of an induction. Induction however, cannot be denied, nor can you affirm it, for it does not assert anything. (Wittgenstein 1979b, p. 82)
There are two claims here: first, there is the claim that generality is expressed correctly not by a statement - i.e. by Vx F(x) understood classically - but by an "induction". Secondly, since it is claimed that such "inductions" are not proper statements, they can't be negated. I shall come back to these two points. I must first explain Wittgenstein's account of proofs by induction (he also used the expression "recursive proofs"), of which they are consequences.
During the early thirties, Wittgenstein held the view that there are two kinds of proofs in mathematics: algebraic proofs and proofs by induction (1959, p. 301 & 1979b, p. 135). According to Wittgenstein, the distin- guishing feature of proofs by induction was that the proposition proved does not appear as the last step of the proof, so that the proof is not a proof of the proposition per se; it has instead the form of a "template" for particular proofs. Here are two telling quotations:
A recursive proof isonly a general guide to an arbitraW special proof. A signpost that shows every proposition of a particular form a particular way home. (Wittgenstein 1965, §164)
Of course the so-called "recursive definition" isn't a definition in the customary sense of the word, because it isn't an equation, since the equation "a + (b + 1) = (a + b) + t" is only part of it. Nor is it a logical product of equations. Instead, it is a taw for the construction of equations. (Wittgenstein 1974, p. 432) (My emphasis.)
We can now begin to see the deep connection between Wittgenstein's ideas and Skolem's free-variable finitism: this account of proofs by induc- tion is very similar to what Hilbert and Bernays had to say in their classic book Grundlagen der Mathematik about Skolem's primitive recursive arithmetic. 26 In a free-variable system of arithmetic such as Skolem's, a proof of the free-variable formula F can be seen as a "template" or "schema"27 yielding proofs of the instances of F, by simple transforma- tions. Consider an instance of F, that is the result of replacing the functions of F by their values, i.e. a variable-free numerical formula: the proof of F can be transformed into a proof of this instance by replacing the variables by the numerals and computing the function values. Here the rule of mathematical induction is replaced by a sequence of conditionals.
In order to extract the philosophical content of the notion of template,

 152 MATHIEU MARION
Wittgenstein asked: "To what extent, now, can we call such a guide to proofs the proof of a general proposition?" (Wittgenstein 1965, §164), and his answer was, in an application of the Tractarian distinction between "saying" and "showing" (4.121-4.1212), that the template does not assert its generality, it shows it in that it "allows us to see an infinite possibility":
Its generality doesn't lie in itself, but in the possibility of its correct application. And for that it has to keep on having recourse to the induction.
That is, it does not assert its generality, it does not express it; the generality is, rather, shownintheformalrelationtothesubstitution, whichprovestobeatermoftheinductive series. (Wittgenstein 1965,§168)
To get to the root of Wittgenstein's ideas, one must go back to one of the most important insights in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, namely that logical constants do not refer (Wittgenstein 1922, 4.0312): if no prior acquaintance with a logical object is to be presupposed by the under- standing of any proposition, the conditions of the meaning must come from the constituents of the proposition themselves. This is what Wittg- enstein meant in the Notebooks, when he said that "the proposition repre- sents the situation - as it were off its own bat" (Wittgenstein 1979a, p. 26). The situation is similar with respect to infinity in mathematics. Wittgenstein was asking that the "infinite possibility" be easily read from the symbolism itself:
To explain the infinite possibility, it must be sufficient to point out the features of the sign which lead us to assume this infinite possibility, or better: what is actually present in the sign must be sufficient.... so everything must be already contained in the sign '11,x, x + 1[' - the expression for the rule of formation. In introducing infinite possibility, I musn't reintroduce a mythical element into grammar. (Wittgenstein 1965, App. 1 p. 314).2s
So, although generality is to be found in templates, they do not express it; generality is inexpressible, being only shown in the template by the possibility of replacing the variables by the numerals and thus of transfor- ming the proof of F into a particular proof.
Wittgenstein drew two important consequences of his account of proofs by induction. Firstly, since a proof by induction does not assert anything, it is not assessable as true or false. Hence the inapplicability of the law of excluded middle:
Therefore, where there is an assertion (Aussage) it can be negated; and where a certain structure (Gebilde)cannot be negated, there is no assertion (Aussage)either. The law of excluded middle however does not apply - simply because we are not dealing with proposi- tions (Sdtze)here. (Wittgenstein 1979b, p. 82)
The parallel with Weyl is striking (although superficial, as we shall see in the next section). The second consequence is that a statement containing the universal quantifier - a Vx F(x) understood classically - "adds some- thing to the proof", i.e. "it does not follow from it" but goes proxy for it (Wittgenstein 1979b, p. 135). It is usually assumed that there is in the

 WITTGENSTEiN AND FIN1TISM 153
end no difference between the utterance of the free-variable form F(a), supposing one has a proof of it, and the utterance of its universal closure Vx F(x), while Wittgenstein was inclined to think that the use of the quantifier blurs the distinction that everyone was at pains to make. There- fore, he denied that a proof by induction, while being a proof of generality, is a proof that the property holds for "all" numbers:
A proof by induction, if it were a proof, would be a proof of generality, not a proof of a certain property of all numbers. (Wittgenstein t965, §168)
It was inappropriate for him to speak of a proof that a certain property holds for "all" natural numbers as if it were a statement about an infinite extension. Wittgenstein expressed this by saying: "But you can't talk about all numbers, because there is no such thing as all numbers" (Wittgenstein 1965, §124).a9 A natural solution is to get rid of the quantifiers. In his Cambridge lectures (Lent term, 1930) Wittgenstein made the following comment:
The rule for infinity can be expressed symbolically as follows: If(i), f(~), f(~ + 1)]. Note that we have to go on step by step. starting from f(1). This is not the kind of generality represented by (x)~bx, (Wittgenstein 1980, p. 14)
He wrote something similar in the PhilosophicalGrammar:
The point of our formulation is of course that the concept "all numbers'" is given by a structure like "tl, 6, ~ + 1]'. The generality is set out in the symbolism by this structure and cannot be described by an (x).fx. (1974, p. 432)
tt is dear from these quotations that Wittgenstein wanted to draw a distinction between the universal quantifier Vx F(x) and expressions of the type [f(1), f(~), f(~ + 1)]. If we follow Wittgenstein correctly, the quantifiers Vx F(x) and 3x F(x) would be used only for finite sequences, because they express external or "accidental" generaIity, which is accept- able only for finite extensions.3° Limiting the use of Vx F(x) to finite sequences and using expressions such as [f(1), f(~), f({ + 1)] for adequate description of infinite series would fulfill the role of a syntactical distinc- tion. 3~
Both expressions
If(l), f(~), f({ + 1)]
and
are derived from the expression (Wittgenstein called it a ~variable")
[a, x, O'x]
found in section 5.2522 of the TractatusLogico-Philosophicus. This "varia- ble" is the general term of a series which consists only of iterations of O with respect to a:

 154 MATHIEU MARION
a, Oa, OOa, O00a, O000a,...
There is an obvious analogy with the scheme of pure iteration: 32
F(a, o),
F(a, Sx) = BF(a, x),
where the function F(a, x) is simply the result of applying the function B x times to a. (The square brackets in Wittgenstein's expression play the role of the iteration-functional.) Raphael Robinson has shown, a long time ago, that with a suitable choice of initial functions, all the primitive recursive functions can be obtained from the scheme of pure iteration (Robinson 1947). This, again, is a strong indication of the affinity between Wittgenstein's ideas and quantifier-free or free-variable arithmetics of the kind proposed in 1923 by Thoralf Skolem and later by his own student Louis Goodstein. I shall conclude this section by making a few remarks about Skolem's primitive recursive arithmetic and Goodstein's equational calculus, in order to substantiate my claim.
In 1923 Skolem published his famous paper, 'Begrtindung der eIemen- taren Arithmetik durch rekurriende Denkweise ohne Anwendung schein- barer VeriTndlichen mit unendlichen Ausdehnungsbereich' (1923), of which Wittgenstein is said to have owned a copy.33 Skolem had just read Prin- cipia Mathematica, and as a finitist solution to the problem of the para- doxes of set theory, he proposed to develop a fair part of elementary arithmetic without the use of unbounded quantifiers as a way of avoiding the need for the theory of types:
If we consider the general theorems of arithmetic to be functional assertions and take the recursive mode of thought as a basis, then that science can be founded in a rigorous way without the use of Russell and Whitehead's notions 'always' and 'sometimes'. (1923. p. 304)
What Skolem called the "recursive mode of thought" consisted of using primitive recursive definitions for the introduction of new functions and in the use of mathematical induction for proofs. Skotem allowed the use of bounded quantifiers only as shorthand notation. He used free-variables only when they ranged over infinite domains. It appears to me that the resulting system of primitive recursive arithmetic (hereafter PRA) embod- ies quite well Wittgenstein's ideas about generality. The expression of generality by the use of a free variable is remarkably similar to Wittgenste- in's conception of generality in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus which was described at the beginning of this section. Although Brouwer and Weyl refused to apply the law of excluded middle to negations of proposi- tions involving quantification over the natural numbers, intuitionism still contains such negations,34while they simply cannot be expressed in Sko- leto's PRA: it is syntactically impossible, since universality is expressed only by the use of a free variable. Intuitionism is therefore wider than Skolem's PRA and farther in spirit from Wittgenstein's constructivism.

 WITTGENSTEtN AND FINITISM 155
A student of Wittgenstein in the early 30's, Goodstein also came to reject classical quantification theory. 35 But in first paper on the subject, 'Function Theory in an Axiom-Free Equational Calculus', written in 1941 (but published in 1945), Goodstein went even further than Skolem by dispensing altogether with the propositional calculus and mathematical induction and developing a pure equational calculus, in which all proposi- tions are equations of the form F = G where F and G are primitive recursive functions or terms and where the rules are substitution and uniqueness instead of induction. 36 This calculus is "logic-free"; sentential connectives and bounded quantifiers are introduced arithmetically. It is worth noticing here that Goodstein himself attributed the idea of replacing induction rules by uniqueness rules to Wittgenstein. Indeed, Wittgenstein wrote many remarks on Skolem's proof by induction of the associative law (Skolem 1923, p. 305-6):
(a+b)+c=a +(b+c),
and one of his many comments on this proof consisted in rewriting it replacing induction by the rule of inference:
F(O)= O(O),
F(Sx) = B(F(x)), G(Sx) = B(G(x)) ~-F(x) = G(x)
(Wittgenstein 1974, p. 397 & 414). This is a rule affirming the uniqueness of the function defined by recursion, a notion which Goodstein deemed "far more intuitively acceptable" (Goodstein 1972, p. 281). The equational calculus is based precisely on this notion of uniqueness (instead of mathe- matical induction) and Goodstein alluded to Wittgenstein's remarks as early as 1945, in a footnote to his paper on 'Function Theory in an Axiom- Free Equational Calculus' (1945, p. 407n.). This is one interesting example of a positive development emerging from Wittgenstein's remarks on math- ematics.37 I must point out that, inasmuch as it is an improvement on Skolem's PRA, this is an indication of the depth of Wittgenstein's thoughts on the subject of finitism.38Wittgenstein's remarks on induction are not, however, a critique of the method itself but rather of the language in which it is presented (Goodstein 1972, p. 281).
It is also interesting to point out that in Goodstein's equational calculus there are means to express bounded universal and existential proposi- tions - which are equivalent to a finite number of conjunctions and dis- junctions - but, as in the case of Skolem's PRA, the negation of un- bounded universal propositions or of unbounded existential propositions cannot be expressed (Goodstein 1.951, p. 30-3I). As far as generality is concerned, Goodstein's equational calculus embodies also quite well Wittgenstein's ideas. I need only to cite here the last sentence of Goodste- in's 1945 paper:
Generality in the calculus may be exhibited without the use of variable signs, the generality

 156 MATHIEU MARION
of the theorem showing itself in the generality of the proof, but a calculus which contains
no variable signs can only show generality, not express it. (1945, p. 434)
(Goodstein means here by "variable" what Russell would call "apparent variables".)
It should be clear by now that the transitional writings indicate that Wittgenstein abandoned his earlier view of the universal quantifier as a logical product and the existential quantifier as a logical sum. This move is parallel to the intuitionist critique of classical quantification theory, although the motivations are different. But Wittgenstein went further than intuitionism by dispensing with quantification theory altogether. This feature brings his foundational stance - assuming he strived for one - closer to that of free-variable finitists, Skolem and Goodstein. It is worth stressing again that both Skolem's PRA and Goodstein's equational calcu- lus, by expressing generality by the use of a free variable rule out the negation of unrestricted general propositions, thereby denying the univer- sal applicability of the law of excluded middle.
2. ON THE LAW OF EXCLUDED MIDDLE
Many commentators of the later Wittgenstein see him as a critic of the universal validity of the law of excluded middle. For example, Robert Fogelin lists "his attacks upon the unrestricted use of the law of excluded middle" as one of the intuitionist themes found in Wittgenstein's writings (1968, p. 267). Anti-realist commentators are more careful: Michael Dum- mett speaks of the "ambivalence" of Wittgenstein's attitude towards the law of excluded middle,39 and Crispin Wright claims that no explicit rejection of it is to be found in Wittgenstein's writings. Instead, one might find some shared common background for its rejection (Wright 1980, p. 142).
The very idea that Wittgenstein had any qualms about the universal validity of the law of excluded middle is, however, strongly rejected by Peter Hacker, who speaks in the second edition of his book Insight and Illusion, of Wittgenstein's remarks on this very topic as "distorted out of all recognition by the anti-realists' Procrustean efforts" (1986, p. 331). Hacker relies almost exclusively on writings of the transitional period, where Wittgenstein appears to claim that where the law of excluded middle does not apply, one simply cannot talk of a proposition. This is, according to Hacker, a clear indication that Wittgenstein didn't intend to reject the law of excluded middle. Indeed, Wittgenstein's reaction to Brouwer's and Weyl's criticisms of the universal applicability of the taw of excluded middle appears at first sight to be essentially negative:
I need hardly say that where the law of the excluded middle doesn't apply, no other law of logic applies either, because in that case we aren't dealing with propositions of mathematics. (Against Weyl and Brouwer.) (1965, §151)4o

 WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 157
Wittgenstein attended the first of Brouwer's Vienna lectures in March 1928, where Brouwer introduced his famous duale Pendelzaht or pendu- lum number. Let d~ be the vth digit of the decimal expansion of ~- and rn = k~ if at d~ for the nth time the segment dmd~+:~.., din+9 forms the sequence 0123456789. Now, if v>~kl then cv = (-1/2) kt, otherwise cv = (-1/2) v, The sequence c~, c2, c3..... forms the real number r - the so-called pendulum number - for which it is impossible to tell if r = 0, r > 0 or r < 0 (Brouwer 1923, p. 337). This number has some peculiar properties: in Brouwer's own words in Vienna, it "is not rational, although its irrationality is absurd, and not comparable with zero, although its incomparability with zero is absurd" (1928, p. 163). (It is precisely on that account that Wittgenstein rejected Brouwer's pendutum number as not a true real number (1979b, p. 73). Indeed, Wittgenstein made it an essential requirement that every real number be effectively comparable with any rational number. I shall come back to this question in the next section.)
Brouwer's intention in building such a number was to provide a counter- example to the law of excluded middle. He claimed in Vienna that "this pendulum number is neither equal nor unequal to zero, in contradiction with the law of excluded middle" (1928, p. 161). To this affrmation, Wittgenstein replied:
Brouwer is right when he says that the properties of his pendulum number are incompatible with the law of the excluded middle. But, saying this doesn't reveal a peculiarity of proposi- tions about infinite aggregates. Rather, it is based on the fact that logic supposes that it cannot be a priori -. i.e. logically - impossible to tell whether a proposition is true or false. For, if the question of the truth or falsity of a proposition is a priori undecidable, the consequence is that the proposition loses its sense and the consequence of this is precisely that the propositions of logic lose their validity for it. (1965, §173)
Hacker reached the conclusion, based on the previous quotations, that Wittgenstein never rejected the law of excluded middle. According to Hacker's Wittgenstein:
The very idea of undecidable propositions is nonsense.... We cannot understand an "unde- cidable proposition of mathematics" because there is nothing to understand. For if it is "undecidable" it is not a proposition. (Hacker i986, p. 127)
I think, however, that Hacker is misreading Wittgenstein. Surely, when Wittgenstein claimed that if the law of excluded middle does not apply to a proposition it "loses its sense", he meant that we are not talking about a genuine statement. But, to use Russell's words, "like most things one wants to talk about in logic, it does not lose its importance through that fact" (1918, p. 230). The error is not to see that all that fuss about the applicability of the taw of excluded middle concerns a very specific class of mathematical propositions, namely the general arithmetical proposi- tions - the so-called U°-sentences - which were at the centre of the Grundlagenstreit in the 20's and 30's.
First of all, one must not be deceived by the fact that Wittgenstein's

 158 MATHIEU MARION
insistence on the universal validity of the law of excluded middle appears, at first sight, to be linked with his old belief in the "bipolarity" of proposi- tions, i.e. in their ability to be true and to be false (Wittgenstein 1979a, p. 94). There is no bipolarity if it is impossible to negate the proposition. When Wittgenstein was saying in the late twenties and early thirties that templates are not genuine statements, he was not saying anything new, since he had already described mathematical equations in the Tractatus as Scheinsgitze, 41 because of their lack of bipolarity. This much remained unchanged during the transitional period: Wittgenstein was still holding that mathematical propositions cannot be negated in the ordinary sense of the word, because we cannot imagine under which circumstances we would be prepared to assert the negation -qF(a) of a free-variable formula F, once we proved it.
Now, in order to understand what is really going on, we need to remind ourselves of an important difference between Hilbert and the intuitionists. For Hilbert, the sentential operators had to be truth-functional, so they Could intelligibly apply only to propositions with determinate truth- conditions. So, precisely because only justification-conditions can be as- sociated with general propositions involving unrestricted quantification, Hilbert admitted that "those laws that man has always used since he began to think, the very ones that Aristotle taught, do not hold" (1925, p. 379). This is an important consequence of the finitist account: it is not only the law of excluded middle that does not apply to finitary propositions, but also the whole Tractarian calculus of truth-functions. 42 Intuitionistic logic had not yet been formalized in the twenties, one had to wait for Heyting's work (1930). Following Heyting, intuitionists, while accepting the finitist account of the quantifiers, think it necessary only to explain the meaning of the sentential operators not by truth-tables but by specifying for each one of them what would justify an assertion of a statement of which it is the principal operator. Wittgenstein clearly sided with finitists against intuitionists: since he was at the time thinking of the logical connectors in terms of truth-tables, as in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, the fact that the law of excluded middle does not hold implied, for him, that "no other law of logic applies either". This is how one should read the passage from §151 quoted above. He was far from implying that the general arithmetical propositions have no status at all, only a different one. These propositions are not entirely devoid of sense;43 we are simply talking about two different things. 44This is perfectly clear in the following passage from the Philosophical Grammar:
The word "proposition", if it is to have any meaning at all here, is equivalent to a calculus: to a calculus in which p v ~p is a tautology (in which the "law of the excluded middle holds). When it is supposed not to hold, we have altered the concept of proposition. But that does not mean we have made a discovery (found something that is a proposition and yet doesn't obey such and such a law); it means we have made a new stipulation, or set up a new game. (1974, p. 368)

 WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 159
Here Wittgenstein agrees that one can "set up a new game", i.e. a logicat system in which the law of excluded middle does not hold, provided one does not interpret this move as a discovery of some kind, but as a modifi- cation of the concept of proposition.
We saw in the previous section that Wittgenstein thought that the result of a proof by induction is not a genuine statement, because the induction does not assert anything. As a result, Wittgenstein would give to what we usually call the "theorems" of arithmetic the status of statements. This is why Wittgenstein wrote that the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra is not a genuine statement:
If the proof that every equation has a root is a recursive proof then that means the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra is not a genuine mathematical proposition. (1965, §168)
This is also the case with Fermat's Last Theorem (of which we now have a proof):
I say: the so-called "Fermat's Last Theorem" isn't a proposition. (Not even in the sense of a proposition of arithmetic.) Rather, it corresponds to a proof by induction. (1965, §189)
Here, Wittgenstein's language may mislead readers, such as Hacker, into thinking that if the law of excluded middle does not apply, there is simply no proposition at all, only nonsense. The confusion is evident in the way Hacker reads §151 of the Philosophical Remarks, which I quoted at the beginning of this section, where Wittgenstein said that "we aren't dealing with propositions of mathematics". But, surely the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra is part of mathematics, there are many different proofs of it and it does not lack sense at all. It would have been foolish of Wittgenstein to deny any mathematical status to the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra! 4s On my reading, he was rather saying that no theorem should be con- strued as a statement assessable in terms of truth and falsity, to which the calculus of truth-functions applies.46
There is another set of remarks which were directed against Brouwer. Wittgenstein sensed in the intuitionist's discourse a remnant of the descrip- tivist attitude of Platonism which he disliked so much. So, according to Wittgenstein, Brouwer spoke as if he had just discovered some special fact about a certain class of propositions, in the same way as a physicist would speak of discovering the laws of nature.47I shall cite this tong but instructive passage of the Philosophical Grammar where Wittgenstein clearly approved the spirit of Brouwer's critique, but not its specifics:
When Brouwer attacks the application of the law of excluded middle in mathematics, he is right in so far as he is directing his attack against a process analogous to the proof of empirical propositions. In mathematics you can never prove something like this: I saw two apples lying on the table, and now there is only one there, so A has eaten an apple. That is, you can't by excluding certain possibilities prove a new one which isn't already contained in the exclusion because of the rules we have laid down. To that extent there are no genuine alternatives in mathematics. If mathematics was the investigation of empirically given aggregates, one could use the exclusion of a part to describe what was not excluded and in

 160 MATHIEU MARION
that case the non-excluded part would not be equivalent to the exclusion of the others. The whole approach that if a proposition is valid for one region of mathematics it need not necessarily be valid for a second region as well, is quite out of place in mathematics, is completely contrary to its essence. Although many authors hold just this approach to be particularly subtle and to combat prejudice. (1974, p. 458)
Wittgenstein's claim as presented in these paragraphs is quite difficult to understand. His point is that the lack of validity of law of excluded- middle in mathematics is a distinguishing feature of all mathematical propositions as opposed to empirical propositions. It would be a mistake, according to him, to base the rejection of this law on some logic-chopping. He could not have meant, however, that one cannot recognize any sub- stantial differences of "grammar" in mathematics. This would run counter to one of his most important leitmotivs. Indeed, most of Wittgenstein's later philosophy of mathematics is built on the "grammatical" distinction between finite sequences and infinite series, a distinction which runs paral- lel to Brouwer's.
One can read remarks such as those just quoted as containing an argu- ment against what Wittgenstein saw as the reintroduction by the back door of a descriptivist viewpoint in Brouwer's arguments against the law of excluded middle. Wittgenstein is arguing against the form of Brouwer's arguments, against his sales-pitch. Even so, it appears to me that Wittg- enstein clearly misconstrued Brouwer's critique by describing it as im- plying the descriptivist viewpoint since the point of Brouwer's counterex- amples, such as the pendulum number, is precisely to avoid it. Brouwer's ultimate intention was to show that incompletely defined ob- jects, such as random real numbers in classical analysis or lawless or choice sequences in intuitionistic analysis require another underlying logic. The pendulum number is a perfect counterexample since it is given by a constructive function - the trick is that it is given in such way that nobody can determine only from the rule if the number r is equal or not to 0. There is no underlying descriptivism here. I shall come back to Brouwer's pendulum number in the next section.
Finally, it should not be forgotten that Wittgenstein's discussion of Brouwer's typical example of the appearance of the pattern 123456789 in the decimal expansion of ~" also provided him with some ground for rejecting the law of excluded middle. Brouwer's example is a formula of the type:
3x F(x) v Vx~ F(x)
with x ranging over an an infinite series. Wittgenstein (or the intuitionist for that matter) would say here that one needs to show either that we can effectively find an a such that F(a) or that we cannot find one. But there are claims we can't make about certain decimal expansions, such as that of vr, unless the calculation up to the relevant point is already done, because there is no information given with the rule with which we are

 WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 161
able to calculate the values of the decimal expansion of a number such as ~r. Therefore, unless we find in our calculations the pattern 123456789, we cannot assert the corresponding 3x F(x), because this claim would be unjustified. Moreover, the fact that we do not possess an instance F(a) does not allow us to assert Vx -~ F(x). This reasoning is behind this remark, recorded by Waismann in December 1929:
There can be no such question as, Do the figures 0, i, 2.. ~9 occur in ~? I can only ask if they occur at one particular point, or if they occur among the first 10,000 figures. No expansion, however far it may go, can refute the statement 'They do occur' - therefore this statement cannot be verified either. What is verified is an entirely different assertion, namely that this sequence occurs at this or that point. Hence you cannot affirm or deny such a statement, and therefore you cannot apply the taw of the excluded middle to it. (1979b, p. 7i)48
I hope that by now the general gist of Wittgenstein's position on the law of excluded middle should be quite clear, although I haven't taken into account all the remarks devoted to this topic. There are many passages about the law of excluded middle in later works such as the Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics which I shall not discuss here. I would like to believe, however, that there is no significant departure from this line of thought. There is also another set of remarks about a related problem, that of mathematical conjectures, which I have not mentioned. But to deal with this difficult question would lead us beyond the limits of this paper.
3. THE CONTINUUM
On many occasions during the transitional period, Wittgenstein wrote (or spoke) about the mathematical continuum. I claim that these remarks show, again, Wittgenstein's profound commitment to finitism.491 shall not discuss here the remarks about Dedekind cuts, nor shall I discuss the remarks against the typically intuitionist notion of choice sequences. But a careful reading will show that they are in line with the views expressed in his discussion of the Cauchy sequences. The same could be said also of the related remarks, written much later, about Cantor's diagonal, which show no basic misunderstanding on Wittgenstein's part - as is usually assumed - when it is understood that he spoke from the viewpoint of someone who accepted only the recursive continuum9
The real numbers are usually defined in terms of Cauchy sequences in the following manner. The sequence (xn) = ~1, x2 .... , x..... ) is a Cau- chy sequence if the difference of the terms Xp and xq of the sequence (xn), i.e. the number Ixp - xql is getting closer to 0 as p and q are getting bigger, i.e.
lira IXp - Xqt = O. p,q-~

 162 MATHIEU MARION
The only necessary condition for a real sequence (xn) to be convergent in R is that it is a Cauchy sequence. This is a criterion of convergence, i.e. the so-called Cauchy criterion: for all real e > 0 there exists a natural A ~ N such that for any p, q > A,
lXp -- Xql "QE.
This criterion plays a useful role: one can see that a real sequence is convergent in R without the need to provide its limit. With it we can define the following equality relation =r in the set of Cauchy sequences, here between (in) and (s,):
(r~)=r(sn)¢:~lira(r~- sn)=0.
This relation identifies sequences which differ in a finite initial part and also those such as 1In and lln2, both converging to 0 but with different convergence behaviour. The set of reals is the set of equivalence classes of Cauchy sequences with respect to this equality relation. It is usually understood that the geometric line contains limits for all Cauchy sequences of rationals, therefore the set of reals is identified with the geometric continuum.
Both Philosophical Remarks and Philosophical Grammar contain exten- sive discussions of the theory of real numbers, whose purpose is, according to Lello Frascolla, "to make clear which kind of law or prescription for the formation of convergent series of rationals can be legitimately considered a genuine generator of a real number" (1980b, p. 242). Wittgenstein ex- pressed two such prescriptions. 51 First, and this should come as no surpr- ise, the prescription must be recursive:
A real number yieldsextensions, it is not an extension. A real number is: an arithmetical lawwhichendlesslyyieldsthe placesof a decimalfraction. (1965,§186)
In quite a coherent fashion, Wittgenstein defines here the prescription for the formation of real numbers in explicit conjunction with his rejection of the descriptivist viewpoint. This prescription follows from Wittgenstein's own understanding of the grammar of the "and so on". Wittgenstein always held a potentialist view of the infinite, in the tradition of Aristotle,52 according to which infinity is defined negatively by the fact that the law "sets no limits" to its application (1965, §139), and the "and so on" indicating an infinite series could not be interpreted as an abbreviation which would, as it were, already be given to us in extension. As we have already seen, this was expressed by Wittgenstem when he said that the dots in "and so on..." are "dots of laziness" only if the series is finite. Accordingly, Wittgenstein insisted that infinite sequences should not be seen as extension but as laws or rules: "Infinity is the property of a law, not of its extension" (1980, p. 13).53 Since real numbers are defined as infinite sequences of rationals, they also must be introduced by a law:

 WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 163
"An irrational number is a process, not a result" (1979c, p. 221). To be a real is to be given by a law:
The true nature of real numbers must be the induction. What I must look at in the real number, its sign, is the induction. - The "So" of which we may say "and so on". (1965, §189)54
There is no room therefore for real numbers given in an extensional manner, no room for "random" real number in Wittgenstein's conception of real numbers. This is the gist of this rather crucial section of the Philosophical Remarks:
Now let's assume we have been given all the irrational numbers that can be represented by laws, but that there are yet other irrationals, and I am given a cut representing a number not belonging to the first class: How am I to tell that this is so? This is impossible, since no matter how far I go with my approximations, there will always also be a corresponding fraction.
And so we cannot say that the decimal fractions developed in accordance with a law still need supplementing by an infinite set of irregular infinite decimal fractions that would be 'brushed under the carpet' if we were to restrict ourselves to those generated by a law. Where is there such an infinite decimal that is generated by no law? And how would we notice that it was missing? Where is the gap it is needed to fill?
If from the very outset only laws reach to infinity, the question whether the totality of laws exhaust the totality of infinite decimal fractions can make no sense at all. (1965, §181 & 1974, p. 473)
Wittgenstein argument seems to be that since only laws "reach to infinity", lawless (or irregular) real numbers can only be given in a finite extension and that for any such finite extension there is a corresponding decimal expansion which in turn is given by a law. This first prescription therefore reduces the real numbers to the so-called "recursive" real numbers, to the exclusion of the "random" real numbers, i.e. arbitrary decimal expan- sions. Arbitrary infinite sequences are sequences generated not by a rule but by an arbitrary selection of one term after another. The usual example of such arbitrary sequences is that of a decimal expansion whose digits are obtained by successive throws of a die. Wittgenstein saw such numbers as "something empirical" (1979b, p. 83), and spoke in their case of an "arithmetical experiment" (1965, §190). He could not accept them.55 These arbitrary sequences were not in accordance with his fundamental view of mathematics as being essentially a "calculus", i.e. an activity of providing algorithms (1974, p. 468). (Hence Wittgenstein's use of the image of the abacus (1965, §157 & 1979b, p. 106).) Wittgenstein clearly stated that reals should be defined in such a way - recursively - that one could not speak of an "arithmetical experiment":
Is an arithmetical experiment still possible when a recursive definition has been set up? I believe, obviously not; because via the recursion each stage becomes arithmetically compre- hensible. (Wittgenstein 1965, §194)

 164 MATHIEU MARION
Random numbers created by successive throws of a die or numbers defined 7----~3
by laws such as ~ are not real numbers because one is simply not given a way of constructing them:
Put geometrically: it's not enough that someone should - supposedly - determine a point ever more closely by narrowing down its whereabouts; we must be able to construct it. (1965, §186 & 1974, p, 477)56
To sum up: Wittgenstein was asking that one possess an effective rule of construction of every infinite series of rationals, i.e. to compute rational approximations. This rejection of random real numbers has ramifications in Wittgenstein's criticism of the intuitionist notion of infinitely proceeding sequences, now known as choice sequences (Wittgenstein 1965, §179; 1974, p. 472; 1979b, p. 83 & t979c, p. 221).
The second prescription on the formation of real numbers is that any real number must be effectively comparable with every rational number, since "being comparable with other numbers is a fundamental characteristic of a number" (1974, p. 476):
It seems to be a good rule that what I will call a number is that which can be a compared with any rational number taken at random. That is to say, that for which it can be established whether it is greater than, less than, or equal to a rational number.
That is to say, it makes sense to call a structure a number by analogy, if it is related to the rationals in ways which are analogous to (of the same multiplicity as) greater, less and equal to.
A real number is what can be compared with the rationals. (1965, §191)57
This prescription originates in Wittgenstein's attempts at avoiding the descriptivist image of the line. Commenting on his insistence on effective comparability, Wittgenstein added:
I want to say that this is precisely what has been meant or looked for under the name 'irrational number'.
Indeed, the way the irrationals are introduced in text books always makes it sound as if what is being said is: Look, that isn't a rational number, but still there is a number there. But why then do we still call what is there a 'number'? And the answer must be: because there is a definite way for comparing it with the rational numbers. (1965, §191)
The second prescription obviously eliminates numbers not given by law - random numbers - since "you can compare a law with a law, but not a taw with no law" (1965, §181). More to the point, it also eliminates some numbers given by a law which fulfills the first prescription, i.e. it implies the rejection of Brouwer's pendulum number, which is given recursively but not comparable in size to 0, from the domain of the reals. Wittgenstein was quite conscious of this fact:
The decisive thing about the construction of real numbers consists precisely in their compat- bility. It is only in virtue of this that the real numbers can be interpreted as points on a straight line.
If, now, there are constructions that cannot be compared with rational numbers, then we

 WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 165
have no right to find them a place among the rational numbers. Thus they simply are not on the number lines. (In Brouwer it appears as if they were real numbers about which we merely did not know whether they were larger than, or smaller than, or equal to another rational number.) (I979b, p. 73)
This is the reason behind Wittgenstein's hostility towards Brouwer's pen- dulum number.
There are many constructive versions of the definition of the real num- bers via the Cauchy sequences to be found in the literature. One notorious example is Errett Bishop's Foundations of Constructive Analysis (1967, Chap. 2). According to Bishop a constructive real is a pair ((rn), p.), where (r~) is a constructively given Cauchy sequence and b~a constructive rate- of-convergence function tz: N ~ N such that:
1
vk>o Vn,m - <:1
Here, equality between reals is defined as:
((r,,),/x) =,. ((sn), u) ~ (r~ - s~) --+0
Real numbers ~ la Bishop clearly give some body to Wittgenstein's insistence on effectivity. To use intuitionist terminology, Bishop is working in "lawlike" analysis and his work corresponds to Brouwer's reconstruc- tion of analysis without its idiosyncratic notion of choice sequences. Since the publication of Bishop's book many logicians have provided formal systems for his constructive analysis: Per Martin-LOf's transfinite type theory, John Myhill's constructive set theory and Solomon Feferman's constructive theory of functions and classes To are some examples. To take one of these, in Feferman's To there seems to be no clear way of distinguishing between "real" and "computable real" numbers, although there are different notions of recursivity, one of them corresponding to Bishop's (Feferman 1984, p. 152). There is also another school of construc- tivism, which limits itsetf to "recursive" or "computable" analysis. 5s (Inci- dentally, the pioneering role played here by Goodstein (1957, 1961) should not be forgotten.) In recursive analysis, the rather vague notions of "law" or "rule" of which Wittgenstein made ample use of are replaced by the precisely-defined concept of recursive function. All "objects" are given by numbers; and these are manipulated only by recursive functions. The connections with Wittgenstein's prescriptions for the formation of real numbers are obvious, since both Wittgenstein and the representative of recursive analysis require an effective method of computation of the ap- proximated rational values. There is, in both cases, no room for random real numbers.

 166 MATHIEU MARION
CONCLUSION
Wittgenstein's writings between 1929 and 1933 show that his thoughts were in constant evolution. It is true that many of the conclusions reached during that period were to be subsequently rejected. In the domain of philosophy of mathematics, however, the intensity with which Wittg- enstein pursued his research diminished sharply after 1935. Many of the topics discussed so extensively in 1929-33 were not to be discussed again. This is a good reason for concentrating our attention on the writings of the early transitional period in order to make good sense of Wittgenstein's remarks about mathematics. The views expressed by Wittgenstein during that period definitely show some deep affinities with Skolem's type of finitism. It seems to me that this is the best way for us to make sense of his numerous remarks about proof by induction and general arithmetical propositions. Wittgenstein's insistence on the fact that generality is inex- pressible, but only shown in proofs by induction, led him to adopt a typically finitist account of general arithmetical propositions according to which they are not akin to full-blown statements which would be assessable as true or false. This, in turn, was the basis of his often ill-understood rejection of quantification theory and of the universal validity of the law of excluded middle. My emphasis on the affinities with free-variable fini- tism may improve our understanding of Wittgenstein's remarks on many other topics, as I illustrated with a brief discussion of the remarks on the continuum.
But the affinities between Skolem's finitism and Wittgenstein presented in this paper should not be misconstrued as an attempt by Wittgenstein to provide a finitist "foundations" of mathematics, which would simply be a variant of the logicist foundations of Principia Mathematica. This was never Wittgenstein's intention; his interest in Skolem's primitive recursive arithmetic did not derive from such an endeavour. As he said in Philosoph- ical Grammar:
... we can't say that Skolem has put the algebraic system on to a smaller foundation, for he hasn't 'given it foundation' in the same sense as is used in algebra. (1974, p. 420)
Wittgenstein certainly liked the fact that Skolem did not work within a formal system,s9
NOTES
1 There are, of course, those who insist that Wittgenstein did not take part in any foun- dational dispute but that he was rather critical of every school of thought in philosophy of mathematics. This is the view held, for example, by Gordon Baker and Peter Hacker (1985, p. 345). Claims of that kind, however, are usually based upon general considerations about Wittgenstein's conception of philosophy and not on an exegesis of particular remarks about mathematics such as those discussed in this paper. This is not the place, however, to discuss this important question.

 WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 167
2 The main feature of strict finitism is the emphasis put on the practical limitations of humans to carry out operations, which leads to the establishment and study of the effects of upper bounds for the lengths of inscriptions considered by the mathematician. Robin Gandy's 'Limitations to Mathematical Knowledge' (1982) is a useful introduction. The interpretation of Wittgenstein as a strict finitist is usually based on an amalgamation of his remarks about "surveyability" of proofs, which seem to involve consideration of what Gandy calls "extreme situations" and the strict finitist insistence on "feasibility". To my mind, this amalgamation amounts to a misreading of Wittgenstein. I shall not criticize this interpretation here, see my forthcoming (Marion 1996).
3 For example, see (Fogelin 1968).
For example, there is a long discussion in Philosophical Grammar (1974, p. 269) on the
relation between the quantifiers and ordinary language which provides him with further arguments against not only the Frege-Russell approach, but also his own in the Tractatus: about the enumeration of the possible positions of a circle within a given square, Wittgenstein wrote: "Here, although we don't ever come to an end, the series isn't endless in the way in which [1, ~, ~ + 11 is" (1974, p. 276). Here, as with concepts such as "plant" or "egg" (Wittgenstein's own examples), it is not a question of "the infinity of possibilities, but a kind of indeterminacy" (1974, p. 276). I shall not discuss this important aspect of Wittgenstein's remarks on the quantifiers.
5 See also (Wittgenstein 1959, p. 297). In Cambridge, W. E. Johnson adopted a similar reading in Part II of his Logic (1922, p. 59), but the context is entirely different. Ramsey, translator of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus and author of a very good review of it, was to adopt Wittgenstein's reading (1926, pp. 158f. & 1927, pp. 54-57). But this was not the reading adopted by Russell & Whitehead, who followed Frege in Principia Mathema~ica: "Our judgment that all men are mortal collects together a number of elementary judgments. It is not, however, composed of these, since (e.g.) the fact that Socrates is mortal is no part of what we assert, as may be seen by considering the fact that our assertion can be understood by a person who has never heard of Socrates. In order to understand the judgment 'ali men are mortal' it is not necessary to know what men there are" (Whitehead & Russell 1925, p. 45). Wittgenstein, however, thought that he could show that in Principia Malhematica 3x F(x) behaves like a logical sum by adopting the definitions 3x F(x) A F(a) = F(a) and 3x F(x)/~ (F(a) v F(b)) = (F(a) v F(b)), from which the primitive propositions "9.1 and "9.11, i.e. resp. F(x) ~ 3z F(z) and F(x) v F(y) --~ 3z F(z) (Whitehead & Russell 1925, p. 131) "'follow as tautologies" (Wittgenstein 1974, p. 268).
6 Initially, Ramsey was very enthusiastic about Wittgenstein's conception of quantifiers as infinite conjunctions or disjunctions, which he described in his 1926 paper, 'The Foundations of Mathematics', as "a most important innovation" (1926, p. 159). Both Wittgenstein and Ramsey changed their mind in 1929.
7 For a discussion of the shortcomings of Wittgenstein's inductive definition, see (Sundholm 1995).
s There was no precise definition of the notion of a recursive function when Wittgenstein wrote the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus - one had to wait for Skolem's t923 paper which will be discussed below - but his notion of 'operation' definitely points towards the notion of recursive function. According to Wittgenstein, the difference between a function and an operation is that the former cannot be its own argument while the result of an operation can be its own basis (Wittgenstein 1922, 5.25I & 1979b, p. 217). Although this explanation is somewhat inadequate, it is sufficient indication that the notion of operation is to be distinguished from the more general set-theoretical definition of functions as the class of many-one relations.
9 There is no evidence that Wittgenstein ever read Poincar6, but he probably became acquainted with Poincard's ideas while studying with Russell before the war.
10 According to Anscombe (1959, p. 128), this accusation was a "'peculiarly vicious blow" to Russell: a circularity was found in "90.163, "90.164 and in the proof of '90.31. The second edition of Principia Mathematica included an appendix in which this objection was dealt with

 168 MATHIEU MARION
(Whitehead & Russell 1925, pp, 650-658); but it is now generally agreed that Russell's attempt, in Appendix B, at predicatively defining the set of natural numbers was also a failure. See (Myhill 1974).
11 The general form of an operation is essential to mathematics and it is derived from the general form of a proposition. This is easily seen by comparing the formulas in 6 and 6.01. In 6.02, Wittgenstein constructed the formal series generated by applying the general form of an operation to itself from an arbitrary base. The series would be:
x, gt'x, [~'f~'x, frll'frx, But with the following definitions:
x = fl°'x Def. f~'f~n'x = f~ ~i'x Def.
the series can be re-written as:
~0'X, ~'~0+I'X, ~"~0+l+l'X, ~'~0+I+I+I'X, . . "
Then, with help of the further definitions:
0+1=I Def. 0+ 1+1=2 Def. 0+1+1+1=3 Def. and so on
the formal series should finally be rewritten as (this last reformulation does not appear in 6.02):
f~°x, alx, a2x, f~Sx....
This explains why Wittgenstein called numbers "the exponent of an operation" (6.021). I hasten to add that Wittgenstein's definition is unsatisfactory from a Dedekindian point of view. While Wittgenstein appears to be interested in what numbers are, given that we understand finite iteration, for Dedekind it is the very notion of finite iteration which requires an analysis. See his letter to Keferstein (Dedekind 1890), and (Mayberry 1987) for a discussion of this question.
i2 Indeed, one peculiar feature of the logicist definitions of the natural numbers is the elimination of the "and so on". See (Russell 1919, pp. 20-21), for example. In Wittgenstein's definition in 6.02 the "and so on" is not eliminated. The definition gives no limit to the possibility of applying the operation which generates the numbers to the results of its own application. Remember that the peculiarity of an operation is that the result of applying the operation may be used in turn as the basis for another application of the operation (5.251). This is the only way to progress in a formal series (5.252). The repeated application of an operation to its own result, Wittgenstein calls its "successive application" (5.2521) and the concept "successive application" is precisely the concept of the "and so on": "The concept of the successive application of an operation is equivalent to the concept "and so on.... (5.2523).
13 It is important to notice that Weyl thought that anyone insisting, as he thought Brouwer did, on the distinction between the finite and the infinite is not hitting the right spot. Indeed, according to Weyl, when elements, say, the pieces of chalk are finite in number but cannot be exhibited one by one, that is if the domain is finite but "unsurveyable", the general proposition isn't a genuine statement (i929, p. 151).
14 Incidentally, an account of dependent quantifiers is missing in the Tractatus. This defect was pointed out by Robert Fogelin in (1976, chap. VI) and Scott Soames has shown how to solve the problem in (1983). It remains that no such solution was proposed by Wittgenstein, who seemed to have remained unaware of this lacuna. This is typical of the difference of attitude between Wittgenstein and Ramsey. While Wittgenstein was interested in a philo-

 WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 169
sophical reflection on the state of the foundations which did not necessarily involve the type of philosophical theorizing we are accustomed to nowadays, Ramsey was on the contrary disturbed by such philosophical reflection and wanted to get on with the technical work. In Wittgenstein's own words, "he did not reflect on the essence the state.., but on how this state might reasonably be organized" (1980b, p. 17). This might explain both Wittgenstein's lack of interest in the matter and Ramsey's interest in Weyl's method.
15 When his own student, Weyl, changed his allegiance, Hilbert started writing his famous series of papers on the foundations of mathematics in the twenties, where he renewed his formalist standpoint. In particular, he adopted WeyI's reading of the alIe and the es gibt. For example, in 'Die logischen Grundlagen der Mathematik', he read the universal quantifier as a logical product and the existential quantifier as a logical sum, adding that with infinite domains the negation of a general judgement (allgemeinen Urteil)or an existential judgement (Existentialurwil) has no precise content (keinen priizisen Inhalt) (1923, p. I82). (Compare this with the earlier view, in (1922, pp. 173-174).) In his 1925 paper, 'Ober das Unendliche', Hilbert introduced a trichotomy between realpropositions, finitary generalpropositions, and ideal propositions (1925, p. 380-381). (This crucial distinction was pointed out to me by Daniel Isaacson, in conversation.) Elementary or real propositions are simply equations involving primitive recursive functions and numerals, such as "2 + 3 = 3 + 2". These proposi- tions have an intuitive content and are verifiable by direct computation. They can be negated, and the law of contradiction and the law of excluded middle hold for them. But besides these unproblematic propositions one will encounter other finitary propositions of problematic character. To use our earlier example, Hitbert claimed that the proposition "there exists a prime number x such that n < x ~<N" is an abbreviation for a logical sum, or disjunction (1925, p. 377-378). Such disjunctions were admissible, because with N one never leaves the domain of finite totalities. But in the infinite case - i.e. unbounded general arithmetical propositions - negation is impossible, because "the proposition cannot be interpreted as a combination, formed by means of "and", of infinitely many numerical equations, but only as a hypothetical judgement that comes to assert something when a numeral is given" (1925, p. 378). It is worth noticing here the strong similarity between Hilbert's notion of "hypothetical judgement" and Weyl's notion of "rule for judging". Hilbert' s claim was that when the domain of quantification is infinite, propositions of the form Vx F(x) cannot be understood as infinite logical products, and therefore can't be negated. This was the very basis of Hilbert' s limited rejection of the law of the excluded middle, which was later recognized by Brouwer as a major success of the intuitionist critique of formalism (1927, p. 491). (C¢: later statements by Hilbert and Bernays in the first volume of Gntndlagen der
Mathematik on Exisrenzsiitze as Partialurteile, on the hypothetischen Sinn of the allgemeines Urteil (1934, p. 32) and about the impossibility of their negation (1934, pp. 33-34).)
16 This change of mind was noticed, at the time of Ramsey's death by Russell, who said of the 'Last Papers' published by Richard Braithwaite, that they "show a tendency towards the views of Brouwer" (1931, p. 481) and by Braithwaite himself, who wrote that by 1929 Ramsey "was converted to the finitist view which rejects the existence of any actual infinite aggregate" (1931, p. xii). Alice Ambrose also mentioned this change of mind in (1935, p. 188, 340). More evidence is to be found in the manuscripts edited recently by Maria Carla Galavotti (Ramsey 1991).
17 For a discussion of the relations between Ramsey and Weyl, see (Majer 1989 & 1991). is It is not clear to my mind who influenced who during the conversations in 1929. In 'Ramsey and Wittgenstein on Scientific Theories' (1991), Rosaria Egidi holds that Ramsey's change of mind was the result of Wittgenstein's influence. But there are reasons to believe that Ramsey was not influenced by Wittgenstein: he knew quite well Weyl's papers and his thoughts had already started to shift before Wittgenstein's return to Cambridge.
19 See also (Wittgenstein 1979b, p. 101) and, towards the beginning of (Wittgenstein 1965, §228): "When I say an hypothesis isn't definitely verifiable, that doesn't mean that there is a verification of it which we may approach even more nearly, without ever reaching it. that is nonsense - ef a kind in which we frequently lapse. No, an hypothesis simply has a different

 170 MATHIEU MARION
formal relation to reality to that of verification. (Hence, of course, the words "true" and "false" are also inapplicable here or else have a different meaning)". As with general arithmetical propositions, the fact that an hypothesis cannot be verified, that it is not assessable as true or false, implies that it has no sense (Wittgenstein 1979b, p. 47). It is worth noticing, again, that the source of this notion of hypothesis is to be found in the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, especially 6.32f.
2o In my forthcoming (Marion 1996), I discuss the origins of Wittgenstein's distinction between Hypothesen and Aussagen and therefore of his finitism in his rejection early in 1929 of the claim, as expressed in proposition 6 of the Tractatus, of the completeness of truth- functional logic. On Wittgenstein's notion of "hypothesis", see also Alva No~'s excellent study, 'Wittgenstein, Phenomenology, and What it Makes Sense to Say' (1994).
21 In a letter from Ramsey to Trinity College cited in (Wittgenstein 1959, p. 254),
22 Ramsey's manuscripts contain remarks which were probably taken down during dis- cussions with Wittgenstein, The best example is item # 004-23-01 of the Frank Ramsey Collection, at tim Hillman Library, University of Pittsburgh, which consists in a series of 20 remarks in German, on the subject of the infinite, either dictated by Wittgenstein or copied by Ramsey from one of Wittgenstein's early versions of Philosophical Remarks.
23 This change of mind was witnessed by RusseU in a report to Trinity College (Russell 1968, p. 200).
24 See (Wittgenstein 1.959.p. 297 & 1979c, p. 5-6). See also Waismann's notes, (Wittgenstein 1979b, p. 45) and later remarks in Philosophical Grammar (1974, p. 268), where Wittgenstein admits that his former view is correct "for one use of words "all" and "some"", i.e. in cases such as "in this square there is one of the primary colours".
25 In his Cambridge lectures Wittgenstein made the claim that the "and so on .... can have a strict and exact grammar" (1980a, p. 89, 90). In the case of finite sequences, Wittgenstein said that employment of "and so on" or the dots "..." would amount to "laziness". This is why he called these the "dots of laziness". Moore reported: "He said he had been misled by the fact that (x). fx can be replaced by fa. fb, fc ..... having failed to see that the latter expression is not always a logical product: that it is only a logical product if the dots are what he called "the dots of laziness", as where we represent the alphabet by "A, B, C...", and therefore the whole expression can be replaced by an enumeration; but that it is not a logical product where, e.g. we represent the cardinal numbers by 1, 2, 3. . . . . where the dots are not the "dots of laziness" and the whole expression can not be replaced by an enumeration" (Wittgenstein 1959, p. 298). See also (Wittgenstein 197%, p. 6). Wittgenstein would then insist that in the case of infinite series, the "and so on" has a completely different grammar and that it should not be understood as an abbreviation for an infinite extension. 26 See (Hilbert 1925, p. 380) and, for the details, (Hilbert & Bernays 1934, pp. 298- 299). Compare Gandy's discussion of "proofs by example" in his paper 'Limitations to Mathematical Knowledge', where he claimed that "our faith in, and understanding of, primitive recursive arithmetic rests on our recognition that its theorems may be given proofs by example" (1982, p. 139), pointing out that this is true of proofs by induction or of their equivalent in Goodstein's equational calculus.
27 In the following I use the expression "template" as a synonym for Wittgenstein's ex- pressions proof by induction", "recursive proof", etc....
2s See also (Wittgenstein 1979b, p. 34).
29 See also (Wittgenstein 1965, §126).
3o Wittgenstein's finitism was quite transparent to his contemporaries. Russell had already noticed it in his introduction to the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Wittgenstein 1922, p. 21). See also (Russell 1936, p. t43). In The Logical Syntax of Language, Wittgenstein's apparent restriction to finite quantifiers, with unrestricted generality expressed by free vari- ables is embodied in Carnap's Language I, with its "limited universal operator" and "limited existential operator" - those were defined as, respectively, a finite sum and a finite product (Carnap 1934, pp. 20-21). Carnap's discussion of Wittgenstein as an ally of intuitionism assumes that he accepted only this finitist Language I (Carnap 1934, pp. 46-49).

 WlTTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 171
sl This account fits niceiy Wittgenstein's criticisms of the Russellian symbolism in (1979b, p. 228). A different solution would be the introduction of a third and new quantifier, ranging over infinite series, while the universal quantifier is used for finite sequences. So far as t know, only Yvon Gauthier has taken up this idea, without previous knowledge of these remarks at the time. See (Gauthier 1985), for his "effinite" quantifier and the corresponding logical system. As a result of our discussions, Gauthier has noticed the parallel between Wittgenstein's remarks and his own "effinite" quantifier (199i, p, 84). It is unlikely, however, that Wittgenstein had in mind a new quantifier for infinite sequences.
32 This analogy was noticed in (Sundholm 1995).
33 See the editor's footnote to (Wittgenstein 1965, §163).
34 Brouwer didn't claim that the law of excluded middle is straightforwardly false, i.e. that we have -~(~ v -n~); he accepted instead: ~ ( q ~ v -7~). Intuitionists simply refrain from asserting the law of excluded middle in certain contexts.
3~ In the preface to Constructive Formalism, Goodstein acknowleged his debt to Wittg- enstein: "'Of the many friends who have helped, encouraged and inspired this work, first and foremost I must mention Ludwig Wittgenstein, to whose lectures in Cambridge between 1931-34 and the many conversations I was privileged to have with him, I am immensely indebted; only in recent years have I grown to understand how much he taught me" (195i, p. 10).
36 See (Goodstein 1971, Chap. 7) for an introduction to Goodstein's free-variable arithmetic. I should like to add that the essential idea that every recnrsive formula can be brought into an equational form F = 0 (with F containing only symbols for primitive recursive functions) is due to G6del (1931).
37 I do not wish to imply, however, that Goodstein's equational calculus was the necessary logical continuation of Wittgenstein's ideas. The equational calculus was simultaneously discovered by Haskell Curry (1941), independently of Wittgenstein. But Curry was also building on the work of Skolem and Hilbert & Bernays.
38 This idea, which originates in Dedekind's Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen (1887, §132) was rediscovered by category theorists in the sixties. See (Lawvere t964).
39 See (Dummett 1959, pp. 178-179). According to Dummett, Wittgenstein's attitude is ambivalent because on the one hand insistence on the law of excluded middle is the expressiorl of a Platonist outlook which he repudiated - i.e. that the general form of an explanation of meaning is in terms of truth-conditions - and, on the other hand, he wished not to interfere with the mathematician and if the latter wishes to use a form of argument based on the taw of excluded middle, he has the right to do so.
4o See also (Wittgenstein 1959, p. 302).
4~ In the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, mathematics is described as an attempt at describ- ing the internal relations which hold between propositions in virtue of the fact that they are generated from each other by an operation. This is why mathematical propositions are considered as Scheinsdtze or pseudo-propositions (6.2).
42 To come back to Hilbert, he did not stop here. His intention was to introduce ideal propositions in order to restore the laws of logic: "we must here adjoin the idealpropositions to the finitaly ones in order to maintain the formally simple rules of ordinary Aristotelian logic" (11925, p. 379), So Hilbert recognized the existence of transfinite formulas as ideal propositions to be added to the finitary propositions, singular and general, in order to reestablish the validity of the laws of classical logic. His metamathematical programme consisted in trying to obtain a real proposition which would be the proof of the consistency of those parts of mathematics using ideal propositions. Therefore, the problem of (finitary) general propositions was transformed in Hilbert's programme into the problem of a finitary consistency proof of the system resulting from the addition of the ideal propositions. The fate of Hilbert's programme need not detain us here. Needless to say that, although his account of general arithmetical propositions was close to Hilbert's, Wittgenstein, like Brouwer, rejected Hilbert's metamathematical programme.

 172 MATHIIE U MARION
43 Wittgeustein was recorded by Moore as implying that these propositions must have a sense (Wittgenstein 1959, p. 303).
44 There is nevertheless an analogy between the two, which justifies the use of the term "proposition" for both. The deeply rooted idea that the essence of mathematics is the production of algorithms is at the base of the analogy. In the early 30's Wittgenstein was thinking in terms of a Satzsystem, within which every problem would be decidable by an algorithm (Frascolla 1984, p. 299). The conceptions of the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus briefly gave place to a verificationism according to which the meaning of a proposition is its method of verification: "How a proposition is verified is what it says . . . . The verification is not one token of the truth, it is the sense of the proposition" (1965, §166 & 1974, pp. 458-459). Mathematical propositions were then said to be akin to genuine propositions inasmuch as a method to decide their truth, i.e. an algorithm, exists: "The method of checking the truth corresponds to the sense of a mathematical proposition. If it's impossible to speak of such a check, then the analogy between "mathematical proposition" and the other things we call propositions collapses" ( 1974, p. 366).
4s Incidentally, Goodstein has obtained, quite late in his career, a finitist proof of Gauss' second proof of the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra (1969).
46 Again, one must see the views expressed here as a development of the Tractarian concep- tion of mathematical propositions as pseudo-propositions. Incidentally, it is worth noticing again the similarity with Ramsey's thoughts in 1929. One finds this fascinating passage in Ramsey's manuscript on 'The Formal Structure of Intuitionist Mathematics': "We cannot therefore assume that mathematical propositions in general can be made arguments to truth- functions and treated by the propositional calculus but must examine this question afresh. It is complicated by the fact that our previous criticisms have left us ~4thout a clear conception of the nature and purpose of mathematics. Our old conception that the "propositions" of mathematics expressed each a true judgement has been destroyed and we have as yet nothing to put in its place" (1929c, p. 205).
47 See also (Wittgenstein 1965, §174 & 1979c, p. 140).
48 See also (Wittgenstein 1959, p. 303 & 1979c, p. 107). This is the view held by Wittgenstein in later remarks, e.g. in Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics: ....But surely all members of the series from the 1st up to the 1,000th, up to the 101°-th and so on, are determined; so surely all the members are determined." That is correct if it is supposed to mean that it is not the case that e.g. the so-and-so-many'th is not determined. But you can see that that gives you no information about whether a particular pattern is going to appear in the series (if it has not appeared so far), And so we can see that we are using a misleading picture" (1978, V, §11). It is precisely against this "misleading picture" that Wittgenstein warned his readers in §352 of Philosophical Investigations,
49 The remarks on the continuum are not the only ones to be explained by Wittgenstein's finitism. For example, the few remarks ever written by Wittgenstein on the axiom of choice, such as the following, are also explainable: "I can make something like a random selection from a finite class of classes. But is that conceivable in the case of an infinite class of classes? It seems to me to be nonsense" (1965, §146). Wittgenstein clearly rejected the very idea of an arbitrary infinite choice of elements for which no rule could be stated. This position is perfectly similar to (Skolem 1922, p. 300).
50 Any appropriate study of Wittgenstein's remarks on this topic and on Grdel's incomplete- ness theorems should take into account Alistair Watson's article 'Mathematics and its Foun- dations' (i938). It was Watson who introduced Turing to Wittgenstein and it is noticeable that Wittgenstein, contrary to famous cases involving Braithwaite and Ambrose, did not object to Watson's recognition that "the interpretation which I shall give of the famous example of Grdel owes much to lengthy discussions with a number of people, especially Mr. Turing and Dr. Wittgenstein of Cambridge" (1938, p. 445).
51 I am here following the excellent work of Frascolla (1980a, pp. 666-667 & 1980b, pp. 242-243).
52 See (Wittgenstein 1959, p. 299; 1965, §123; 1974, p. 281-282 & 1978, II, §45; V, §14).

 WITTOENSTEIN AND FINITISM 173
The conflict of this potentialist viewpoint with Cantor's m should be obvious to anyone. Wittgenstein would disagree very much with Russell's explanation in Introduction to Mathe- matical Philosophy: "The cardinal number R0 is the limit in order of magnitudes of the cardinal numbers 1, 2, 3.... n........ What makes N0 the limit of the finite numbers is the fact that, in the series, it comes immediately after them,.. 2' (1919, p. 97).
s3 See also (1965, §144 & App. 1, p. 313). At the same time in Vienna, Felix Kaufmann expressed a similar finitist view: "When we operate with the expression "and so on", as we do in describing infinite constructions, the stress must therefore lie on the word "so"; and. that is determined by a law" (1930, p. 136). (Wittgenstein disagreed, it seems, with another aspect of Kaufmann's work (Wittgenstein 1979b, p. 84).)
54 More precisely, Wittgenstein asked that we look at the arithmeticai law: "But can I be in doubt whether all the points of a line can actually be represented by arithmetical rules. Can I then ever find a point for which I can show that this is not the case? If it is given by means of a construction, then I can translate this into an arithmetical rule, and if it given by chance, then there is, no matter bow far I continue the approximation, an arithmetically defined decimal expansion which is concomitant with it. It is clear that a point corresponds to a rule" (1965, §180),
55 See (1965, §182) or (1965, §179) where Wittgenstein discusses the example of successive throws of a coin as defining a point on the line by bisection and asks "does this geometrical process define a number?" His answer is: "But the operation is not an arithmetical one. (And the point which I call to my aid in my endless construction can't be given arithmetically at all)".
7~3
56 There are many discussions of Wittgenstein's bizarre example, X/2, where 7--+3 means
that whenever 7 appears in the expansion of V~ one must replace it by 3. According to 7~3
Wittgenstein ~ does not determine a real number, because it isn't an arRhmetical operation:
"Even if I wasn't familiar with the rule for forming ~/-2, and I took ~ to be the original prescription, I would still ask: what's the idea of this peculiar ceremony of replacing 7 by 3? Is it perhaps that 7 is taboo, so that we are forbidden to write it down? For substituting 3 for 7 surely adds absolutely nothing to the law, and in this system it isn't an arithmetical operation at aI!'~3(1965,§186). The problem with such an example is that it is difficult to see
in what sense ~ is not an arithmetic operation, it seems perfectly effective. See also (1965, §188).
s7 See also (Wittgenstein 1965, §§195-7 & 1979b, pp. 72-73).
ss A good representative of this school is Oliver Aberth. See (Aberth 1970, 1980) and (Beeson 1985, Chap IV). The opening paragraph of Aberth's 'Computable Analysis and Differential Equations' is a statement of his programme: "Computable analysis is an analysis restricted to the field of computable numbers where a real number is called computable if there is an algorithm for obtaining precise rational approximations. Algorithms also are the basis for the definitions of the functions and sequences of computable analysis, and in every instance of a number, function or sequence, an appropriate defining algorithm is assumed available" (1970, p. 47). As with Wittgenstein, Aberth requires an effective method of computation of the approximated rational values. Moreover, Aberth's formulation also makes obvious the central role of algorithms, a role which corresponds perfectly to Wittgen- stein's claim that mathematics is essentially of algorithmic nature.
59 Research for this paper was carried out under a post-doctoral fellowship from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada, while I was a Visiting Scholar at the University of St. Andrews during the academic year 1991-92. An earlier version of the first part was read at the 9th International Congress of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science at Uppsala, Sweden, in August 1991. I would like to thank Michael Dummett, Yvon Gauthier, Bob Hale, Jaakko Hintikka, Juliet Floyd, Daniel Isaacson, Georg Kreisel, Ulrich Majer, John Mayberry, Alva NoG Charles Parsons, Silvio Pinto, Nils-Eric Sahlin, Peter Sullivan, Stephen Read and Crispin Wright for helpful comments.

 174 MATHIEU MARION
REFERENCES
Aberth, O.: 1970, 'Computable Analysis and Differential Equations', in J. Myhill, A. Kino and R. E. Vesley (eds.): 1970, Intuitionisrn and Proof Theory, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 47-52.
Aberth, O.: 1980, Computable Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Ambrose, A.: 1935, 'Finitism in Mathematics', Mind 44, pp. 186-203 & 317-40. Anscombe, G. E. M.: 1959, An Introduction to Wittgenstein's Tractatus, third edition,
Hutchison, London.
Baker, G. P. and P. M. S. Hacker: 1985, Wittgenstein: Rules, Grammar and Necessity,
Blackwell, Oxford.
Beeson, M. J.: 1985, Foundations of Constructive Mathematics. MetamathernaticaI Studies,
Springer, Berlin.
Bishop, E.: 1967, Foundations of Contructive Analysis, McGraw-Hill, New York.
Black, M.: 1964, A Companion to Wittgenstein's 'Tractatus', Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge.
Braithwaite, R. B.: 1931, 'Editor's Introduction', in F. P. Ramsey: 1931, The Foundations
of Mathematics and other Essays, R. Braithwaite (ed.), Kegan Paul, Trench Trubner &
Co., London., pp. ix-xiv.
Brouwer, L. E. J.: 1923, 'On the Significance of the Principle of Excluded Middle in
Mathematics, especially in Function Theory', in van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 335-45. Brouwer, L. E. J.: 1927, 'Intuitionistic Reflections on Formalism', in van Heijenoort (1967),
pp. 490-2.
Brouwer, L. E. J.: 1928, 'Mathematik Wissenschaft und Sprache', in L. E. J. Brouwer:
1976, Collected Works, A, He3~ing (ed.), North-Holland, Amsterdam, vol. 1, pp. 417-
28.
Carnap, R.: 1934, The Logical Syntax of Language, Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner & Co,
London.
Curry, H. B. : 1941, 'A Formalisation of Recursive Arithmetic', American Journal of'Mathe-
matics 63, pp. 263-82.
Dedekind, R.: 1890, 'Letter to Keferstein', in van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 99-103. Dummett, M. A. E.: 1959, 'Wittgenstein's Philosophy of Mathematics', in M. A. E. Dum-
mett: 1978, Truth and other Enigmas, Duckworth, London, pp. 166-85.
Dummett, M. A. E.: 1990, 'The Source of the Concept of Truth', in G. Boofos (ed.), Meaning and Method: Essays in Honor of Hilary Putnam, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, pp. 1-15.
Egidi, R.: 1991, ' Ramsey and Wittgenstein on Scientific Theories', Theoria 57, pp. 196-
210.
Feferman, S.: 1984, 'Between Constructive and Classical Mathematics', in M. Richter, E.
B0rger, W. Oberschelp, B. Schinzel and W. Thomas (eds.): 1984, Computation and Proof
Theory, Springer, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1104, Berlin, pp. 143-62.
Fogelin, R: I968, 'Wittgenstein and Intuitionism', American Philosophical Quarterly 5, pp.
267-74.
Fogelin, R.: 1976, Wittgenstein, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.
Frascolla, P. : 1980a, 'I1 concetto di infinito nella filosofia della mathematica di Wittgenstein',
Annali della Scuola Norrnale Superiore di Pisa. Classe de lettere e filosofia 10, pp. 639-74. Frascolla, P.: 1980b, 'The Constructivist Model in Wittgenstein's Philosophy of Mathemat- ics', in S. G. Shanker (ed.): 1986, Ludwig Wittgenstein. CriticalAssessrnents, Croom Helm,
London, vol. 3, pp. 242-9.
Frascolla, P.: 1984, 'Wittgenstein e il Principio del Terzo Escluso', Rivista di Filosofia 75,
pp. 293-9.
Gandy, R. O.: 1982, 'Limitations to Mathematical Knowledge', in D. van Dalen, D. Lascar
and J. Smiley (eds.): 1982, Logic Colloquium '80, North-Holland, Amsterdam, pp. 129- 46.

 WITTGENSTEIN AND FINITISM 175
Gauthier, Y.: 1985, 'A Theory of Local Negation: The Model and some Applications', Archly far mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 25, pp. 127-43.
Gauthier, Y.: 1991, De la logique interne, Vrin, Paris.
G6del, K.: 1931, 'On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Principia Mathematica and
Related Systems I', in van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 596-616.
Goodstein, R. L.: 1945, 'FunctionTheory in an Axiom-Free Equation Calculus', Proceedings
of the London Mathematical Society 48, pp. 402-34.
Goodstein, R. L.: 1951, Constructive Folvnati~m, Leicester University Press, Leicester. Goodstein, R. L.: 1957, Recursive Number Theory, North-HoiIand, Amsterdam. Goodstein, R. L.: 1961, Recursive Analysis, North-Hollmnd, Amsterdam.
Goodstein, R. L.: 1969, 'A Constructive Form of the Second Gauss Proof of the Fundamental
Theorem of Algebra', in B. Dejon and P. Henrici (eds.): 1969, Constructive Aspects of
the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra, Wiley, London, pp. 69-76.
Goodstein. R. L.: 1971, Development of Mathematical Logic, Logos Press, London. Goodstein, R. L.: 1972, 'Wittgenstein's Philosophy of Mathematics', in A. Ambrose and M.
Lazerowitz (eds.): 1972, Ludwig Wittgenstein. Philosophy' and Language, Allen & Unwin,
London, pp. 271-86.
Hacker, P. M. S.: 1986, Insight and Illusion, second edition, Clarendon Press, Oxford. Heyting, A.: 1930, 'Die Formalen Regeln der IntuitionistischenLogik', Sitzungsberiehte der
Preussischen Akademie der Wissenschaften 30, I, pp. 42-56, I!, pp. 57-71, III, pp. 158-
169.
Hilbert, D.: t922, 'Neubegrtindung der Mathematik. Erste Mitteilung', in Hilbert (1935),
pp. 157-77.
Hilbert, D.: 1923, 'Die logischen Grundlagen der Mathematik', in Hilbert (1935), pp. 178-
91.
Hilbert, D.: 1925, 'On the Infinite', in van Heijenoort (1967), pp. 367-92.
Hilbert, D. and P. Bernays: 1934, Grundlagen der Mathematik, Bd. 1, Springer, Berlin. Hilbert, D.: 1935, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, vol. 3, Springer, Berlin.
Johnson, W. E.: 1922, Logic. Part H, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Kaufmann, F.: 1930, 'The Infinite in Mathematics and its Elimination', in B. McGuinness
(ed.): 1978, The Infinite in Mathematics, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, pp. t-164.
Lawvere, W.: 1964, 'An Elementary Theory of the Category of Sets', Proceedings of the
National Academy of Science 52, pp. 1506-11.
Majer, U.: 1989, 'Ramsey's Conception of Theories: An Intuitionistlc Approach', History
of Philosophy Quarterly 6, pp. 233-58.
Majer, U.: 1991, 'Ramsey's Theory of Truth and the Truth of Theories: A Synthesis of
Pragmatism and Intuitionism in Ramsey's Last philosophy', Theoria 57, pp. 162-95. Marion, M.: 1996, Wittgenstein, Finitism, and the Foundations of Mathematics, Oxford
University Press, forthcoming.
Mayberry, J.: 1987, 'What are Numbers?', Philosophical Studies 54, pp. 317-54.
MyhiI1, J.: 1974, 'The Undefinability of the Set of Natural Numbers in the Ramified Prin-
cipia', in G. Nakhnikian (ed.): 1974, Bertrand Russell's Philosophy, Duckworth, London,
pp. 19-27.
No~, A.: 1994, 'Wittgenstein, Phenomenology and What it Makes Sense to Say', Philosophy
and Phenomenological Research 54, pp. 1-42.
Ramsey, F. P.:
Ramsey, F. P.:
Ramsey, F. P.:
Ramsey, F. P.: 1929a, 'Genera1 Propositions mad Causality', in Ramsey (1978), pp. 133-51. Ramsey, F. P.: 1929b, 'Principles of Finitist Mathematics', in Ramsey (1991), pp. 197-202. Ramsey, F. P.: 1929c, 'The Formal Structure of IntuitionistMathematics', in Ramsey (1991),
1925, 'Universals', in Ramsey (1978), pp. 17-39.
1926, 'The Foundations of Mathematics', in Ramsey (1978), pp. 152-212. t927, 'Facts and Propositions', in Ramsey (1978), pp. 40-57.
pp. 203-220.
Ramsey, F. P.: 1929d, 'Notes on Theories', in Ramsey (1991), pp. 228-236.
Ramsey, F. P.: 1978, Foundations, D. H. Mellor (ed.), Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.

 176 MATHIE U NIARION
Ramsey, F. P.: 1991, Notes on Philosophy, Probability and Mathematics, M. C. Galavotti (ed.), Bibliopolis, Naples.
Robinson, R.: 1947, 'Primitive Recursive Functions', Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 53, pp. 925-42.
Russell, B.: 1919, Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, Allen & Unwin, London. Russell, B.: 1931, 'Critical Notice on The Foundations of Mathematics and other Logical
Essays. By Frank Plumpton Ramsey', Mind 40, pp. 476-82.
Russell, B.: 1936, 'The Limits of Empiricism', Aristotelian Society Proceedings, N. S. 36,
pp. 131-150.
Russell, B.: 1968, The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell. 1914-1944, Allen & Unwin,
London.
Skolem, T.: 1922, 'Some Remarks on Axiomatized set Theory', in van Heijenoort (1967),
pp. 291-301.
Skolem, T.: 1923, 'The Foundations of Elementary Arithmetic established by means of the
Recursive Mode of ThoughL without Use of Apparent Variables ranging over Infinite
Domains', in van Heijenoort (I967), pp. 303-33.
Soames, S.: 1983, 'Generality, Truth-Functions, and Expressive Capacity in the Tractatus',
The Philosophical Review 92, pp. 573-89.
Sundholm, G.: 1995, 'The General Form of the Operation in Wittgenstein's Tractatus',
forthcoming in Grazer Philosophische Studien.
van Heijenoort, J.: 1967, From Frege to GOdel. A Sourcebook in Mathematical Logic,
1879-1931, Harvard University Press, Cambridge Mass.
Watson, A. G. D.: 1938, 'Mathematics and its Foundations', Mind 47, pp. 440-51.
Weyl, H.: 1921, 'Uber die neue Grundlagenkrise der Mathematik', in Weyl (1968), vol. 2,
pp. 143-80.
Weyl, H.: 1929, 'Consistency in Mathematics', in Weyl (1968), vol. 3, pp. 150-70.
Weyl, H.: 1940, 'The Ghost of Modality', in Weyl (1968), vol. 3, pp. 684-709.
Weyt, H.: 1968, GesammelteAbhandhmgen, K. Chandrasekharan (ed.), Springer, Berlin. Whitehead, A. N. and B. Russell: 1925, Principia Mathematica, Volume 1, Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.
Wittgenstein, L. : 1922, Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London. Wittgenstein, L. : 1959, 'Wittgenstein's Lectures in 1930-33', in G. E. Moore: Philosophical
Papers, Allen & Unwin, London, pp. 252-324.
Wittgenstein, L.: 1965, Philosophical Remarks, Blackwell, Oxford.
Wittgenstein, L.: 1974, Philosophical Grammar, Blackwell, Oxford.
Wittgenstein, L. : 1978, Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics, revised third edition,
Blackwell, Oxford.
Wittgenstein, L.: 1979a, Notebooks 1914-1916, revised second edition, Blackwell, Oxford. Wittgenstein, L.: 1979b, Ludwig Wittgenstein and the Vienna Circle, Blackwell, Oxford. Wittgenstein, L.: 1979c, Wittgenstein's Lectures, Cambridge 1932-19.35, Blackwell, Oxford. Wittgenstein, L.: 1980a, Wittgenstein's Lectures, Cambridge I930-1932, Blackwelt, Oxford. Wittgenstein, L.: 1980b, Culture and Value, Blackwell, Oxford.
Wright, C. J. G.: 1980, Wittgensteinon the Foundations of Mathematics, Duckworth, London.
Department of Philosophy University of Ottawa
65 University, P,O. Box 450 STN A Ottawa ON K1N 6N5
Canada
View publication stats
